Worked Example: Example 1.3 Coulomb’s law for electrostatic force between two point charges and Newton’s law for gravitational force between two stationary point masses, both have inverse-square dependence on the distance between the charges and masses respectively. (a) Compare the strength of these forces by determining the ratio of their magnitudes (i) for an electron and a proton and (ii) for two protons. (b) Estimate the accelerations of electron and proton due to the electrical force of their mutual attraction when they are 1 Å (= 10 -10 m) apart? ( m p = 1.67 × 10 –27 kg, m e = 9.11 × 10 –31 kg) Solution (a) (i) The electric force between an electron and a proton at a distance r apart is: 1 4 e e F r ε = − π where the negative sign indicates that the force is attractive. The corresponding gravitational force (always attractive) is: 2 0 m FG r = − 2 p e G where m p and m e are the masses of a proton and an electron respectively. 2 39 F e F Gm m ε = × π 0 2.4 10 4 G p e (ii) On similar lines, the ratio of the magnitudes of electric force to the gravitational force between two protons at a distance r apart is: FF e Gm m G p = 0 4 π ε 1.3 × 10 36 However, it may be mentioned here that the signs of the two forces are different. For two protons, the gravitational force is attractive in nature and the Coulomb force is repulsive. The actual values of these forces between two protons inside a nucleus (distance between two protons is ~ 10 -15 m inside a nucleus) are F e ~ 230 N, whereas, FG ~ 1.9 × 10 –34 N. The (dimensionless) ratio of the two forces shows that electrical forces are enormously stronger than the gravitational forces. EXAMPLE 1.3 Reprint 2026-27 Physics (b) The electric force F exerted by a proton on an electron is same in magnitude to the force exerted by an electron on a proton; however, the masses of an electron and a proton are different. Thus, the magnitude of force is 1 4 0 e r = 8.987 × 10 9 Nm 2 /C 2 × (1.6 ×10 –19 C) 2 / (10 –10 m) 2 | F | = 2 π ε = 2.3 × 10 –8 N Using Newton’s second law of motion, F = ma , the acceleration that an electron will undergo is a = 2.3×10 –8 N / 9.11 ×10 –31 kg = 2.5 × 10 22 m/s 2 Comparing this with the value of acceleration due to gravity, we can conclude that the effect of gravitational field is negligible on the motion of electron and it undergoes very large accelerations under the action of Coulomb force due to a proton. The value for acceleration of the proton is 2.3 × 10 –8 N / 1.67 × 10 –27 kg = 1.4 × 10 19 m/s 2 EXAMPLE 1.3 Example 1.4 A charged metallic sphere A is suspended by a nylon thread. Another charged metallic sphere B held by an insulating EXAMPLE 1.4 10 Reprint 2026-27 Electric Charges and Fields handle is brought close to A such that the distance between their centres is 10 cm, as shown in Fig. 1.4(a). The resulting repulsion of A is noted (for example, by shining a beam of light and measuring the deflection of its shadow on a screen). Spheres A and B are touched by uncharged spheres C and D respectively, as shown in Fig. 1.4(b). C and D are then removed and B is brought closer to A to a distance of 5.0 cm between their centres, as shown in Fig. 1.4(c). What is the expected repulsion of A on the basis of Coulomb’s law? Spheres A and C and spheres B and D have identical sizes. Ignore the sizes of A and B in comparison to the separation between their centres. Solution Let the original charge on sphere A be q and that on B be q ¢ . At a distance r between their centres, the magnitude of the electrostatic force on each is given by r = ′ 1 4 0 2 π ε F qq neglecting the sizes of spheres A and B in comparison to r . When an identical but uncharged sphere C touches A, the charges redistribute on A and C and, by symmetry, each sphere carries a charge q /2. Similarly, after D touches B, the redistributed charge on each is q ¢ /2. Now, if the separation between A and B is halved, the magnitude of the electrostatic force on each is EXAMPLE 1.4 ′ = F q r r F 1 4 2 1 4 0 2 π ε ( / )( / ) ( / ) ( ) qq Thus the electrostatic force on A, due to B, remains unaltered.

Summary: Coulomb's law (Easy)