Worked Example: Example 1.4 If N 2 gas is bubbled through water at 293 K, how many millimoles of N 2 gas would dissolve in 1 litre of water? Assume that N 2 exerts a partial pressure of 0.987 bar. Given that Henry’s law constant for N 2 at 293 K is 76.48 k bar. Solution The solubility of gas is related to the mole fraction in aqueous solution. The mole fraction of the gas in the solution is calculated by applying Henry’s law. Thus: (nitrogen) p K = 0.987bar 76,480 bar = 1.29 × 10 –5 x (Nitrogen) = As 1 litre of water contains 55.5 mol of it, therefore if n represents number of moles of N 2 in solution, mol 55.5 mol + n = 55.5 n = 1.29 × 10 –5 x (Nitrogen) = ( n in denominator is neglected as it is < 55.5) Thus n = 1.29 × 10 –5 × 55.5 mol = 7.16 × 10 –4 mol  4 7.16×10 mol × 1000 mmol 1 mol = 0.716 mmol Henry’s law finds several applications in industry and explains some biological phenomena. Notable among these are: · To increase the solubility of CO 2 in soft drinks and soda water, the bottle is sealed under high pressure. · Scuba divers must cope with high concentrations of dissolved gases while breathing air at high pressure underwater. Increased pressure increases the solubility of atmospheric gases in blood. When the divers come towards surface, the pressure gradually decreases. This releases the dissolved gases and leads to the formation of bubbles of nitrogen in the blood. This blocks capillaries and creates a medical condition known as bends , which are painful and dangerous to life. Reprint 2026-27 To avoid bends, as well as, the toxic effects of high concentrations of nitrogen in the blood, the tanks used by scuba divers are filled with air diluted with helium (11.7% helium, 56.2% nitrogen and 32.1% oxygen). · At high altitudes the partial pressure of oxygen is less than that at the ground level. This leads to low concentrations of oxygen in the blood and tissues of people living at high altitudes or climbers. Low blood oxygen causes climbers to become weak and unable to think clearly, symptoms of a condition known as anoxia . Effect of Temperature Solubility of gases in liquids decreases with rise in temperature. When dissolved, the gas molecules are present in liquid phase and the process of dissolution can be considered similar to condensation and heat is evolved in this process. We have learnt in the last Section that dissolution process involves dynamic equilibrium and thus must follow Le Chatelier’s Principle . As dissolution is an exothermic process, the solubility should decrease with increase of temperature.

Exercise: Intext Questions 1.6 H 2 S, a toxic gas with rotten egg like smell, is used for the qualitative analysis. If the solubility of H 2 S in water at STP is 0.195 m, calculate Henry’s law constant. 1.7 Henry’s law constant for CO 2 in water is 1.67 × 10 8 Pa at 298 K. Calculate the quantity of CO 2 in 500 mL of soda water when packed under 2.5 atm CO 2 pressure at 298 K.

Summary: Gas Temperature/KK H /kbar (Easy)